
Abstract

   This document describes a way to create a communication link to Mars
   using TCP/IP protocol.  Aim of this proposed solution is to lower the
   latency in the worst case scenarios, such as when the Sun is blocking
   communications or when a packet gets lost and has to be
   retransmitted.  Our solution to this problem is setting up a
   satellite link relay system, which will save the packets it receives
   until it receives ACK signal from the next satellite. If a packet
   goes missing, it will be retransmit from the satellite rather than
   from its origin.


                              Proposal                          [Page 1]

      Relay system for Earth to Mars Digital Communication      May 2020


Table of Contents

   1. Introduction ....................................................3
   2. The Latency Problem .............................................4
         2.1.  Satellite Relays .......................................4
         2.2.  Satellite Constellation ................................4
   3. Data Integrity vs. Transfer Speed ...............................5
   4. Other reserach about the subject ................................6
   5. Summary .........................................................7
   6. Sources .........................................................8







                              Proposal                          [Page 2]

      Relay system for Earth to Mars Digital Communication      May 2020


1.  Introduction

   As colonization of Mars gets closer, there are still some problems 
   that must be solved before a such plan can happen.  Currently NASA
   has a long-term goal of sending humans to Mars by 2030s [1], so there
   is not much time to lose.

   One of the problems is how to use wireless data transmission as a
   means of communications.  The problem is that if a packet gets lost
   into the space, the time cost of resending the packet from Mars
   (or Earth) is way too long, making the communications between the
   planets challenging.

   Our solution to this problem is setting up a relay link system
   between the planets, using satellites strategically positioned to
   Lagrangian points and to the orbit of the Sun, Earth and Mars.  The
   relay links will have some memory, which will be used to cache TCP/IP
   packets.  This way, if a packet goes missing on its way to Earth
   or Mars, it can be resent from the relay satellite, instead of
   sending it from its origin planet, which would cause massive overall
   latency.

   The above solution will be discussed in more detail in the second
   chapter. In the third chapter, we will discuss about data integrity
   and the fourth chapter will have quick summary about this paper.



                              Proposal                          [Page 3]

      Relay system for Earth to Mars Digital Communication      May 2020

2. The Latency Problem

   As both Earth and Mars occupy their own respective orbits of the Sun,
   the distance between the two planets is by no means constant. The
   theoretical minimum of the interplanetary distance is as little as 56
   million kilometers, with the theoretical maximum being as large as
   401 million km - over 7.3 times the minimum distance.  This means,
   that when using a lightspeed physical layer in Earth-Mars
   communications, the transmission delay varies from roughly 3 minutes
   to 22 minutes (of course, this would require communications through
   the Sun, so the actual maximum delay is even larger).  On average,
   the interplanetary distance is 225 million km - causing an average
   theoretical delay of 13 minutes. [2]

   While obviously an inconvenience in itself, the transmission delay
   is not a problem that can be solved with our current understanding of
   physics.  Instead the problem that this document proposes a
   mitigation to is the overall latency realized as packets are lost and
   retransmitted - the retransmission of a single package at the
   worst-case scenario (that is the theoretical maximum interplanetary
   distance) would cause an overall theoretical latency of some 45
   minutes (again, the real-world value would be even larger).

2.1 Satellite Relays

   Our proposed solution to the latency issue is setting up a relay link
   system to the space, which would relay the packets between the 
   planets.  When a connection from Earth to Mars (or vice versa) is 
   established, every link will open their own TCP session to the link
   next to them.  The link relay satellites must have enough memory and
   logic so that they are able to create these sessions between them.

   The motivation behind this satellite relay solution is to split the
   total travelling distance to smaller chunks.  In case of packet loss,
   the lost packet would have to be transmitted only from the previous
   relay satellite, instead of the planet of origin - reducing the
   ultimate latency time.  The relays should use some kind of algorithm
   to determine the best link relays for the whole path at the current
   situation.  If the planets are close to  each other, there should be
   fewer links than for example when the  planets are furthest away from
   each other.

   Now if a packet goes missing, noticing it will be much quicker,
   because of the TCP sessions between the links.  The links will cache
   all packets that they receive for transmitting, and if a packet goes
   missing they will simply retransmit it until they receive ACK from
   the next relay.  At this point, the packet may be removed from the
   link's memory.

   Getting this communication link up and running might be slower,
   because it requires individual connections to bet set up for the link
   satellites.  This problem can be overcome, if the links between the
   satellites always stay up.


2.2 Satellite Constellation

   We propose that the satellite link relays will be placed to the
   Lagrangian points of both Earth and Mars.  In addition, there should
   be some edge relays placed in the orbits of the said planets.  By
   placing the satellite link relays to Lagrangian points, we can make 
   sure that the Sun will never be able to block the communications 
   between the planets completely.

   Further research to optimize the satellite locations should be made.



                             
                              Proposal                          [Page 4]


      Relay system for Earth to Mars Digital Communication      May 2020

3. Data Integrity vs. Transfer Speed                            

   This document will not go into the actual technological components of
   interplanetary receiver/transmitter implementations, however it is
   important to know the main points to consider when making
   compromises between data transfer speed and sacrificing channel
   capacity for forward error correction purposes.

   The main difference between relevant resources on Earth and
   interplanetary communication is that massive latency is usually
   an issue on Earth, while due to regulatory reasons, bandwidth is much
   more of a scarce resource. The opposite could be said about
   planet-to-planet communications; while there is a lot of bandwidth
   available (for now), the latency, more specifically the multiplied
   latency in case of packet loss, is a major factor to consider.

   Taking these resource factors into account, development should
   prioritize data integrity over transfer speed.  However, similar to
   terrestrial wireless communications, different channel codes should
   be developed to provide varying goodput values, as the channel will
   without doubt vary over time, as the interplanetary distance changes,
   along with the strength of solar noise.  As the communication will be
   split into shorter distances via the use of relay satellites, the
   channel coding can also be altered for example at every link, be it
   either planet-satellite or satellite-satellite.


                              Proposal                          [Page 5]

      Relay system for Earth to Mars Digital Communication      May 2020

4. Other research about the subject                         



                              Proposal                          [Page 6]

      Relay system for Earth to Mars Digital Communication      May 2020

5. Summary                         

   This proposal for an Earth-Mars communications system uses an array
   of satellites which will simultaneously act as relay points and
   memory caches.  The caching decreases the total latency experienced
   in actual planet-to-planet communications, as the need to retransmit
   data from the planet of origin is eliminated, should it become
   corrupted between two relay points.  The satellites are to be
   positioned so that interplanetary communications are possible even
   when the two planets are at the opposite sides of the sun.  Further
   development work should prioritize data integrity over transfer
   speed, as avoiding any need of resending packets is a key part of the
   need for this kind of system.

                              Proposal                          [Page 7]
      
      Relay system for Earth to Mars Digital Communication      May 2020

5. Sources

   [1]   Mars 2020 Mission Contributions to NASA's Mars Exploration 
         Program Science Goal,
         https://mars.nasa.gov/mars2020/mission/science/goals/
         Read: 11.05.2020

   [2]   How Far Away is Mars? | Distance to Mars
         space.com,
         https://www.space.com/16875-how-far-away-is-mars.html
         Read: 11.05.2020

                              Proposal                          [Page 8]

      Relay system for Earth to Mars Digital Communication      May 2020
